---
icon: pen-to-square
date: 2024-01-09
category:
  - interview
tag:
  - behavioral questions
---

# Behavioral Questions

## what is the STAR method?

The STAR method is an interview technique that gives us a straightforward format we can use to tell a story by laying out the situation, task, action, and result.

- **Situation**: Set the scene and give the necessary details of our example.
- **Task**: Describe what our responsibility was in that situation
- **Action**: Explain exactly what steps I took to address it.
- **Result**: share what outcomes my actions achieved.

## Self-introduction:

## talk about the project:

## How do you fix a bug in a project?

1. clown the project to my local machine
2. reproduce the bug on my local machine. This means making the bug happen again so I can observe it directly.
3. Understand the bug. I will using a debugger and logger to log bug statements
4. identify the cause. Once I understand the bug, I will try to identify the root cause.
5. fix the bug. Once I identify the cause. I will try to modify the code to correct the problem.

## What will you do if there is a bug or problem in project you are unable to solve at work?

- **Research More:** I would spend more time researching the problem. This could involve reading documentation, looking for similar issues on forums like Stack Overflow, or studying the codebases more deeply to understand how it works.

- **Ask for Help:** If still stuck after doing research, I would ask for help. I would ask a teammate who has more experience or knowledge in the area where the problem is occurring.

- **Take a Break:** Sometimes, stepping away for a little white can also help. It can give us a fresh mindset. I might take a short break, work on a different task. I would have a fresh perspective when I come back to the problem.

## Can you describe a difficult problem you had to solve in the previous project?

One of the difficult problem was managing the storage and processing of massive volumns of data generated by the automated driving sensors.There are a couple of key challenges in this problem. The first one is the scalability. As the number of sensor increases, the data volumn grows exponentially. So we need to ensure the system grows as the sensor scales. The second one is the data velocity. The automated driving sensors generate data continously and at high speed. High data velocity requires the system with robust and efficient data streaming capacity. The last challenge of this problem is Automated driving systems generate a wide variety of data types, including structured data (like telemetry data with specific fields and formats) and unstructured data (such as video feeds and images) Each type of data requires different processing and categorization strategies. To solve that, we were using the Azure Event Hubs for real-time data ingestion. We designed a preprocessing layer to normalize data formats. For example, to normalize structured data like telemetry data, we convert data into common format like json, csv and we standardizing the naming conventions of fields. For the unstructured data such as images video feeds and images, we standardizing the file formats like converting all images to JPEG and resizing images or videos to a uniform resolution. After normalizing data, we use Azure Stream Analytics to categorize data streams based on content. The last part is the data storage, we use Azure blob storage for unstructured data like video feeds and Azure sql server for the structured telemetry data. With the team's colloboration and efforts, we not only implemented a scalable system that can analyze real-time data ingestion but also reduce the costs associated with data management and storage by 22%.

## Tell me about a time when you had to learn a new technology or tool to complete a project.

## Describe a situation where you had to collaborate with a difficult team member.

## Tell me about a time when you had to handle a significant change or unexpected turn of events in a project?

## Can you describe a situation where you had to make a problem critical decision under pressure?

## Describe a situation where you had to balance multiple tasks at once. How did you prioritize?

## Tell me about a time when you had to explain a complex technical issue to a non-technical person?

## Describe a situation where you
